---
permalink: /
title: "About the Washington Merged Longitudinal Administrative Data"
excerpt: "About WMLAD"
author_profile: true
redirect_from: 
  - /about/
  - /about.html
---

The Washington Merged Longitudinal Administrative Data (WMLAD) is  a novel data resource comprising longitudinal and geocoded administrative records from seven Washington state agencies. WMLAD is a uniquely comprehensive data source, made possible by the high quality of Washington’s data systems. Records are linked using a single unique person identifier, allowing researchers to merge information from different state agencies and follow individuals over time. All datasets cover the period 2010-2016, with some covering longer periods. Together, these records contain information on over 10 million individuals, representing a near-census of Washington’s adult residents during this time.

The datasets included in WMLAD touch on important economic and social indicators, with rich information on employment, social services, residential location and mobility, and demographic characteristics. State Unemployment Insurance (UI) records report quarterly, job-level hours worked and wages earned, enabling granular analysis of labor market trends. Notably, Washington is one of only four states that report data on hours worked in these records. Records from the Department of Social and Health Services (DSHS) and Health Care Authority indicate participation and benefits received for a number of key public assistance programs. Birth records from the Department of Health contain rich demographic information on parents of children born in Washington. Washington State Patrol records contain detailed information on arrests. Voter records from the Secretary of State track voting behavior. 

In addition, the WMLAD team at UW has worked to further enhance these records by compiling information on residential address and demographic characteristics across sources. The team is developing novel methods to compile address data (from voter records, driver’s license records, DSHS client records, and birth records) and create longitudinal residential address histories at the Census block level. Demographic data on racial and ethnic identity, age, and sex are also compiled from multiple data sources to construct a more comprehensive demographic profile of important populations, such as Washington workers.


Background on WMLAD’s Development
======

In 2014, the City of Seattle passed a minimum wage ordinance requiring employers to increase workers’ pay to at least $15 per hour over the course of several years. A group of University of Washington faculty convened to study the impact of this wage ordinance on a set of outcomes (i.e. the University of Washington Minimum Wage Study, or MWS). The MWS has drawn upon Unemployment Insurance (UI) data generated by the Washington State Employment Security Department as a principal data source. The MWS used UI data on quarterly earnings and hours worked to assess the impact of Seattle’s minimum wage ordinance on hours, wages, and earnings. 

However, UI data alone cannot answer many key questions about poverty and inequality. These data do not link workers to households , meaning poverty rates cannot be calculated, and primary and secondary earners cannot be identified. In addition, for low-income households who rely on a combination of earnings and means-tested benefits, wage data can only partially describe household economic well-being. Furthermore, UI data lack information about the demographic or social characteristics of workers beyond wage level and industry. Age, race, ethnicity, gender, and nativity play large roles in labor market success, but Washington’s UI data cannot speak to these dimensions. The lack of these demographic characteristics limits the ability to evaluate distributional effects of minimum wage increases. 

In response to these limitations, researchers at UW teamed up with Washington state researchers to generate a merged data resource that could supplement UI records with information from other state agencies. WMLAD resolves many of the limitations of the MWS data by merging UI data with state voting records, the drivers’ license database, public assistance and child support records, vital statistics, and select criminal justice system records. 

Enhancing WMLAD Administrative Records with Demographic and Geographic Information
======

Building on the original administrative records from state agencies, the WMLAD team at UW has worked to enhance these records by compiling information on demographic characteristics and residential address across sources. 

**Demographics.** Demographic data on racial and ethnic identity, age, and sex are also compiled from multiple data sources to construct a more comprehensive demographic profile of important populations, such as Washington workers.  Demographic data in WMLAD come from four different sources (see Table 2). Age and sex are reported in all four sources, and race/ethnicity is reported in the birth parent records and the DSHS client records. In addition, we are able to impute race and ethnicity for individuals who are included in the DOL and SOS records, using the Bayesian Improved Surname Geocoding method.  This method imputes a probability that an individual belongs to one of six race/ethnicity categories based on combining information about (1) the probability of belonging to a given category based on an individual’s last name and (2) the proportion of people in a given category who live in a given Census tract or block group. As an illustration of the coverage of the demographic records, Figure 1 depicts the availability of demographic data for anyone who worked in a UI-eligible job in Washington between 2010 and 2016 (a population of roughly 5.7 million workers).

**Residential addresses.** In addition, the team is developing novel methods to compile address data (from voter records, driver’s license records, DSHS client records, and birth records) and create longitudinal residential address histories at the Census block level. Address data are drawn from the same four sources that contain demographic information: driver’s license records, voter records, DSHS client records, and DOH birth parent records. The WMLAD team is developing a method to compile monthly data from across these sources and impute residential location in months where there is no known address reported in the administrative data. 

Using WMLAD for Policy-Relevant Research
=====

As the WMLAD team continues to build out the data, WMLAD is being used to build knowledge about policy effects as well as the interplay among wages, employment, and different family and social outcomes. Ongoing and planned research includes:

*	Assessing the effects of Seattle’s Minimum Wage Ordinance on means-tested benefit use.
*	
*	Studying parental employment patterns around the time of a child's birth in a period of time (2012-2016) prior to implementation of Washington State's Paid Family and Medical Leave policy, in the interest of developing pre-policy baseline estimates.
*	
*	Exploring the temporal dynamics of wage earnings and means-tested benefits and the relationship between earnings volatility and benefit take-up. 

